Onda Format v0.5.0 (#28)
beacon-biosignals/OndaFormat: README.md

- Julia: https://github.com/beacon-biosignals/Onda.jl

## Terminology

This document uses the term...

- ...**"LPCM"** to refer to [linear pulse code modulation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pulse-code_modulation), a form of signal encoding where multivariate waveforms are digitized as a series of samples uniformly spaced over time and quantized to a uniformly spaced grid.

> - ...**"signal"** to refer to the digitized output of an individual sensor or process. A signal is comprised of metadata (e.g. LPCM encoding, channel information, sample data path/format information, etc.) and associated multi-channel sample data.

Author: Can just change "an individual sensor or process" to "process" to avoid ambiguity w.r.t. to "sensor"

    - ...popular distributed analytics tools (e.g. Spark, TensorFlow).
    - ...traditional databases (e.g. PostgresSQL, Cassandra).
    - ...object-based storage systems (e.g. S3, GCP Cloud Storage).

> - ...enable metadata, annotations etc. to be stored and processed separately from raw sample data artifacts without significant file system overhead.

Author: > sample can also be something like exampleor test in various toolkits (e.g. "the X data shipped with Y")

yeah not sure there's a decent way around this

> artifacts has a meaning in computing/storage (used here), but also in (neuro)science (noise, error, "signal" not of interest (in the "signal and the noise" sense).

I think I could use the term "files" here instead

> - ...enable metadata, annotations etc. to be stored and processed separately from raw sample data artifacts without significant file system overhead.

Reviewer: Yeah, the polysemy (the linguistic term for "overloadedness") of technical words is a pain.

Re "files" -- maybe ask one other person whether that's still understandable? I think it works.

    - ...popular distributed analytics tools (e.g. Spark, TensorFlow).
    - ...traditional databases (e.g. PostgresSQL, Cassandra).
    - ...object-based storage systems (e.g. S3, GCP Cloud Storage).

> - ...enable metadata, annotations etc. to be stored and processed separately from raw sample data without significant communication overhead.

Reviewer: even better.

- ...increments to `minor` correspond to changes/additions that are unlikely to break existing Onda readers
- ...increments to `patch` correspond to purely textual changes, e.g. clarifying a phrase or fixing a typo

> Note that, in accordance with the semantic versioning specification, `0.minor.patch` releases may include breaking changes:

Author: > this sounds like even patches be be breaking in 0.x.y

that's not the intention of this statement, I'll update to clarify

> Major version zero (0.y.z) is for initial development. Anything MAY change at any time. The public API SHOULD NOT be considered stable.

### Overview

The Onda format describes three different types of files:

- `*.annotations` files: [Arrow files](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Columnar.html#ipc-file-format) that contain annotation (meta)data associated with a dataset.
- `*.signals` files: Arrow files that contain signal metadata (e.g. LPCM encoding, channel information, sample data path/format, etc.) required to find and read sample data files associated with a dataset.
- sample data files: Files of user-defined formats that store the sample data associated with signals.

Note that `*.annotations` files and `*.signals` files are largely orthogonal to one another - there's nothing inherent to the Onda format that prevents dataset producers/consumers from separately constructing/manipulating/transferring/analyzing these files. Furthermore, there's nothing that prevents dataset producers/consumers from working with multiple files of the same type referencing the same set of recordings (e.g. splitting all of a dataset's annotations across multiple `*.annotations` files).

> The Arrow tables contained in `*.annotations` and `*.signals` must have [attached custom metadata](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Columnar.html#custom-application-metadata) containing the key `"onda_format_version"` whose value specifies the version of the Onda format that an Onda reader must support in order to properly read the file. This string takes the form `"vM.m.p"` where `M` is a major version number, `m` is a minor version number, and `p` is a patch version number.

Author: > Is this resolved like Julia's dependency bounds, i.e. the half-open interval [this version, next-potentially breaking-sem-version)?

It's an exact version of the format; support bounds and related resolution is an implementation-specific thing

i.e. presumably an implementation that supports format version `v1.m.p` will also support `v1.(m+1).(p+2)` if it implements the format correctly + OndaFormat version numbers are bumped appropriately, but ultimately it's up to the implementation to declare that kind of thing and map its own version to supported format versions appropriately

> The Arrow tables contained in `*.annotations` and `*.signals` must have [attached custom metadata](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Columnar.html#custom-application-metadata) containing the key `"onda_format_version"` whose value specifies the version of the Onda format that an Onda reader must support in order to properly read the file. This string takes the form `"vM.m.p"` where `M` is a major version number, `m` is a minor version number, and `p` is a patch version number.

Reviewer: Right, that's what I was getting at: this is the version used to write the file, but as long as the standard and implementations are playing nice with SemVer, then everything will be fine.

(Then nothing more to do here, move along. :grin: )

Each of the aforementioned file types are further specified in the following sections. These sections refer to the [logical types defined by the Arrow specification](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/format/Schema.fbs). Onda reader/writer implementations may additionally employ Arrow extension types that directly alias a column's specified logical type in order to support application-level features (first-class UUID support, custom `file_path` type support, etc.).

### `*.annotations` Files

An `*.annotations` file contains an Arrow table with the following columns in the following order:

1. `recording_uuid` (128-bit `FixedSizeBinary`): The UUID identifying the recording with which the annotation is associated.
2. `uuid` (128-bit `FixedSizeBinary`): The UUID identifying the annotation.
3. `start_nanosecond` (`Duration` w/ `NANOSECOND` unit): The annotation's start offset in nanoseconds from the beginning of the recording. The minimum possible value is `0`.

> 4. `stop_nanosecond` (`Duration` w/ `NANOSECOND` unit): The annotation's stop offset in nanoseconds (exclusive) from the beginning of the recording. This value must be greater than the annotation's corresponding `start_nanosecond`.

Author: Impulses are not prohibited, the bound is just exclusive

> This value must be greater than or equal to

That's contradictory with the fact that the upper bound is exclusive

| `recording_uuid`                     | `uuid`                               | `start_nanosecond` | `stop_nanosecond` | `value`                       |
|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------|-------------------|-------------------------------|
| `0xb14d2c6d8d844e46824f5c5d857215b4` | `0x81b17ea902504371954e7b8b167236a6` | `5e9`              | `6e9`             | `"this is a value"`           |
| `0xb14d2c6d8d844e46824f5c5d857215b4` | `0xdaebbd1b0cab4b89acdde51f9c9a1d7c` | `3e9`              | `7e9`             | `"this is a different value"` |
| `0x625fa5eadfb24252b58d1eb350fa7df6` | `0x11aeeb4b743149808b53547642652f0e` | `1e9`              | `2e9`             | `"this is another value"`     |
| `0xa5c01f0e50fe4acba065fcf474e263f5` | `0xbc0be95e3da2495391daba233f035acc` | `2e9`              | `3e9`             | `"wow what a great value"`    |

### `*.signals` Files

A `*.signals` file contains an Arrow table with the following columns in the following order:

1. `recording_uuid` (128-bit `FixedSizeBinary`): The UUID identifying the recording with which the annotation is associated.

> 2. `file_path` (`List` of `Utf8`): A string identifying the location of the signal's associated sample data file. This string must either be a [valid URI](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_Identifier) or a relative file path (specifically, relative to the location of the `*.signals` file itself).

Reviewer: why are these (and the a few others) `List` (or even `List` of `List`)? 

(am I stumbling on an Arrow terminology issue?)

Author: I thought that `Utf8` corresponded to a fixed-width character column type (so string == `List` of `Utf8`)  but I should check that, it might be that `Utf8` has a 1-1 correspondence with string

Author: > it might be that Utf8 has a 1-1 correspondence with string

I think this IS the case, good catch!

Reviewer: :tada:

In this section, we describe several alternative technologies/solutions considered during Onda's design.

- HDF5: HDF5 was a candidate for Onda's de facto underlying storage layer. While featureful, ubiquitous, and technically based on an open standard, HDF5 is [infamous for being a hefty dependency with a fairly complex reference implementation](https://cyrille.rossant.net/moving-away-hdf5/). While HDF5 solves many problems inherent to filesystem-based storage, most use cases for Onda involve storing large binary blobs in domain-specific formats that already exist quite naturally as files on a filesystem. Though it was decided that Onda should not explicitly depend on HDF5, nothing inherently technically precludes Onda dataset content from being stored in HDF5 in the same manner as any other similarly structured filesystem directory. For practical purposes, however, Onda readers/writers may not necessarily automatically be able to read such a dataset unless they explicitly feature HDF5 support (since HDF5 support isn't mandated by the format).

> - Avro: Avro was primarily considered as an alternative to one-sample-data-file-per-signal approach ultimately adopted by Onda, [initially motivated by Uber's use of the format in a manner that was extremely similar to an early Onda prototype's use of NPY](https://eng.uber.com/hdfs-file-format-apache-spark/). Unfortunately, it seems that most of the well-maintained tooling for Avro is Spark-centric; in fact, the overarching Avro project [has struggled (until very recently) to keep a dedicated set of maintainers engaged with the project](https://whimsy.apache.org/board/minutes/Avro.html). Avro's most desirable features, from the perspective of Onda, was its compression and "random" row access. However, early tests indicated that neither of those features worked particularly well for signals of interest compared to domain-specific seekable compression formats like FLAC.

Author: lol rereading these, neither are grammatically correct 😂 

Here's a rewrite that hopefully addresses the point you brought up:

```suggestion
- Avro: Avro was originally considered as an alternative to Onda's current approach (associating one sample data file per row in `*.signals`). Avro's consideration was [initially motivated by Uber's use of the format in a manner that was extremely similar to an early Onda prototype's use of NPY](https://eng.uber.com/hdfs-file-format-apache-spark/). Unfortunately, it seems that most of the well-maintained tooling for Avro is Spark-centric; in fact, the overarching Avro project [has struggled (until very recently) to keep a dedicated set of maintainers engaged with the project](https://whimsy.apache.org/board/minutes/Avro.html). Avro's most desirable features, from the perspective of Onda, was its compression and "random" row access. However, early tests indicated that neither of those features worked particularly well for signals of interest compared to domain-specific seekable compression formats like FLAC.
```

> - Avro: Avro was primarily considered as an alternative to one-sample-data-file-per-signal approach ultimately adopted by Onda, [initially motivated by Uber's use of the format in a manner that was extremely similar to an early Onda prototype's use of NPY](https://eng.uber.com/hdfs-file-format-apache-spark/). Unfortunately, it seems that most of the well-maintained tooling for Avro is Spark-centric; in fact, the overarching Avro project [has struggled (until very recently) to keep a dedicated set of maintainers engaged with the project](https://whimsy.apache.org/board/minutes/Avro.html). Avro's most desirable features, from the perspective of Onda, was its compression and "random" row access. However, early tests indicated that neither of those features worked particularly well for signals of interest compared to domain-specific seekable compression formats like FLAC.

Reviewer: LGTM!

- EDF/MEF/etc.: Onda was originally motivated by bulk electrophysiological dataset manipulation, a domain in which there are many different recording file formats that are all generally designed to support a one-file-per-recording use case and are constrained to certain domain-specific assumptions (e.g. specific bit depth assumptions, annotations stored within signal artifacts, etc.). Technically, since Onda itself is agnostic to choice of file formats used for signal serialization, one could store Onda sample data in MEF/EDF.

> - BIDS: BIDS is an alternative option for storing neuroscience datasets. As mentioned above, Onda's original motivation is electrophysiological dataset manipulation, so BIDS appeared to be a highly relevant candidate. Unfortunately, BIDS restricts EEG data to [very specific file formats](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/04-modality-specific-files/03-electroencephalography.html#eeg-recording-data) and also does not account for the plurality of LPCM-encodable signals that Onda seeks to handle generically.

Author: too bad they picked EDF 😁

> - BIDS: BIDS is an alternative option for storing neuroscience datasets. As mentioned above, Onda's original motivation is electrophysiological dataset manipulation, so BIDS appeared to be a highly relevant candidate. Unfortunately, BIDS restricts EEG data to [very specific file formats](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/04-modality-specific-files/03-electroencephalography.html#eeg-recording-data) and also does not account for the plurality of LPCM-encodable signals that Onda seeks to handle generically.

Reviewer: Oh, nobody likes EDF. But it's a formal standard (which until recently wasn't the case for a lot of formats used by common hardware) and used by a lot of hardware.

They also support BrainVision, which is not unlike Onda in a lot of ways, just the metadata and annotations are stored in what are essentially INI files. (And I was actually thinking of BV when I wrote about multiplexing.)
